Once you've loaded your data into R, then
you might want to do is manipulate
that data, and so you can set it up to be
a tidy data set.
Variables in the columns and observations
in the rows, and
only the observations that you want to be
able to analyze.
So this, first lec, part of this lecture
is going to
recover some of the information that
you've already seen about subsetting,
that you've probably seen in your R
programming class, in
case you don't remember it off the top of
your head.
So what I'm going to do, is I'm going to
create a data frame here, and I'm going to
create that data frame with three
variables that
they're labeled var one, var two, and var
three.
And then what want to do is I'm actually
going to scramble
up those variables so that they're not in
a specific order.
And I'm going to make some of the values
be missing.
So I'm going to make some of the values
NA.
Once I've done all that, I see that this
is the data set that I've created.
So, you can see in any of the
columns that the va, values aren't
necessarily in order,
and you can see that for variable two,
there's a couple of missing values with
the NAs.
So, the first thing that I can do is I can
subset a specific
column by doing x comma one, where I have
x open bracket comma one.
And what that'll do is actually open up
just the first column of that data frame.
The other thing I can do is if I want to
subset
by a column, I can again do x open bracket
comma.
And then I can actually use the variable
name
before the close bracket to subset just
that column.
I can subset by both rows and columns at
the same time.
So for example, this command here, x, open
bracket, one colon two, comma var two,
will
actually output the first two rows of x,
and the first and the second column of x.
So you could subset both on rows and
columns at the same time.
So, the other thing is that you can do is
you can subset using logical statements.
So, for example, suppose I want to find
out all the rows
of x where variable one is less than or
equal to three.
And variable three is greater than 11, so
to define
those rows I can pass it this logical
argument like
that, to subsetting the rows and I end up
with
just the rows where both of those
conditions are met.
I can also use an or, so I can try to find
the
places the rows where, variable one is
less than or equal to three or,using
type command here variable three is
greater than 15 ,and the result is this
data frame here where one or the other of
those two conditions is met.
Finally, if I'm dealing with NA values
subsetting on NAs
will not produce the actual rows, and so
what you want to do, is you
want to use the which command, so if you
use which, it will
return the indices where variable two is
greater than eight in this case.
And so when it returns the indices where
variable two is greater than
eight, it doesn't return the NAs, and so
you can subset the data set.
Even dealing with the NAs that you might
have.
You can also sort variables.
So using the sort command.
So if you type sort and then pass it x
of variable one, it'll sort the values in
increasing increasing order.
You can tell it to sort them in decreasing
order with the parameter decreasing set
equal to TRUE.
And then the other thing you can do
is, when you're dealing with a variable
that has
missing values, you can tell it to put all
the NA values at the end of the sort.
So you can say, na.last equals TRUE.
The other thing that you can do is, you
can actually order a data frame by a
particular variable.
So suppose that I want to order the data
frame,
in other word I want to sort all of these
rows.
By the values of variable one, so that the
varia, values
of variable one are in increasing order as
I go down.
So what I can do is take this function
order and apply
it to that variable one, and then pass the
results of that ordering
as the selection to the rows of the matrix
x, and what that'll do is
reorder the rows so that variable one is
in increasing order.
You can also order by multiple variables,
so for
example, you can pass it variable one and
variable
three and so what it'll do, is it will
first sort so variable one is in
increasing order.
And then if there are multiple values of
variable one that are the same,
it will sort the values of variable three
in increasing order within those values.
So it sorts the first variable first, and
the second variable in the first variable.
You can actually do that the same thing
with the
plyr package, which is a package written
by Hadley Wickham.
And what you can do, is once you've
loaded that library, you can use the
arrange command.
So the arrange command takes a data frame
and then you can tell it a variable.
And that variable will the variable that
the data frame is sorted on.
So now you can see we've sorted on
variable one,
and so variable one is in an increasing
order here.
You can also tell it to do decreasing
order by just passing
the, to the arrange command, the data
frame, and variable one but wrapped
with the desc function which will tell it
to put it in ascending order.
You can also add rows and columns to data
frames,
quite straight forward process so you just
basically say x of
variable four, so this is a variable that
wasn't in
the data frame before, we are going to
assign to that variable.
A new vector that that's random normal
vector of length the
same dimension as the number of rows of
the data set.
And then you can see that, that variable
has
just been added to the data set like that.
Another way that you can do this is by
using the cbind command,
so what that will do is it will take the
data set, the data
frame x, and it will column-bind the new
vector to [UNKNOWN] basically add
a column to basically add a column on the
right hand side of x.
If I put these in any other order, if I
put rnorm five here, and then put
x second, what it would do is it would
bind that column to the left side of x.
Which is sort of intuitive.
If you want to bind the rows, you can use
the rbind command.
So it's the same command, only with an r
at the beginning.
And so if you put the rnorm at the end
what it'll do is it'll bind it to the
bottom
of the data frame, and if you put it
before,
it'll bind it to the top of the data
frame.
There are a lot more notes that are to be
had on subsetting
and reordering and sorting in the R
programming course in the data science
track.
And I've taken some of these information
from these nice set of lecture notes by
Andrew Jaffe, who teaches the Windsor
Institute here
at the John Hopkins School of Public
Health.
And you can check out his lecture notes
for more information as well.
[SOUND]